so there's clearly something about the
american food environment that has
triggered this obese diabetic phenotype
the question is what is it
[Music]
gary talbs welcome to the show
um pleasure to be here
man i'm really excited for this your
book good calories bad calories changed
my life and my entire approach to diet
and uh just read your new book the case
for keto
and i am blown away so
gary uh there's a quote from your book
that really stopped me dead in my tracks
as somebody that really believes in the
things that you have written about uh
even i have a hard time with this one
and so i want to start there and the
quote goes like this
fat people are not
lean people who eat too much
how on earth is that possible
okay so let me start with one thing and
using the words fat people in the book
uh i
am speaking as they did uh
50 60 years ago knowingly and typically
i would have said people who suffer from
obesity
are not people who don't who eat too
much so i just want to
point out that the uh
social and acceptability of the language
was on purpose to make a point and in
the book it feels completely contextual
okay so
you know we've grown up with this belief
system that people get fat because they
ate too much that's what we've been
taught if you if you gain weight easily
if you're someone who fattens easily
another term i knowingly sort of co-op
from 1950s diet books
um
the you are
supposed to get that way not because
your body gains fat easily or your body
gains weight easily just like somebody
who's
you know my
12 year old son soon to be 13 is uh
plays aau basketball and there are kids
who
gain height easily
and kids who don't particularly at 12 so
he's five five and he wishes he was five
ten and he'll never get there
that's not determined by how much he
eats or exercises that's biological
so the alternative hypothesis those of
us who get fat and easily simply our
bodies want to store calories as fat
so some people's bodies don't some
people's bodies do
and the problem with thinking that those
of us who do get that way merely because
we eat too much is in the advice you
give them is to eat less and exercise
more which doesn't fix the problem the
body's still trying to accumulate fat or
it's still trying to
technical terms partition the calories
it takes in into fat
all right i think we need to dive deeply
into that because that that moment there
is where all the conflict is
so talk to me about the um the energy
balance equation and how it could be
possible and you talk about the mouse
study in the book which was fascinating
i never heard that before but talk to me
about how
the the energy balance equation isn't
the only thing that matters it just
seems impossible for a lot of people
that it isn't a simple equation of if i
put in 2 000 calories and i don't burn
2000 calories i am obviously going to
gain weight and if i'm burning 2 000
calories and i only eat 1800 then i
should lose weight and therefore i
should just be able to tell people eat
less and you're burning
so why doesn't that end up working
okay so that energy balance equation
which is the first law of thermodynamics
and energy is conserved um
and again since so occasionally since
the 1930s then it accelerates in the
1960s in the history you start you
seeing people rely on thermodynamics is
the explanation for obesity so the idea
is you've got
delta e the change in energy in a system
is equal to the energy in
minus the energy out that's what the
law of thermodynamic tells us and it
basically just says energy is conserved
so if a system is getting more energetic
it's got to take in energy more energy
than it expends
system's getting less energetic it means
that it's letting energy out the energy
isn't
magically appearing or disappearing so
the amount of energy in the universe is
conserved the amount of energy in a
closed system is conserved it's all
makes perfect sense and it's always true
that's why we call the law of physics
but all it says
is that one thing is equal to something
else
so in this case if you think of the
energy in the system is the energy
stored in fat
the energy stored in fat goes up
if delta e is positive then that's equal
that's the equivalent of saying more
energy is going into the fat than is
leaving the fat
okay if delta e the energy stored in the
fat goes down
delta e is negative that's equal to the
equivalent of saying more energy is
leaving the fat than is going in it's
like
makes
it's so
crazy simple it's one law of
thermodynamics it's easy to understand
it's an example i use in my lectures is
imagine if we were asking the question
why is the energy you've got a room full
of people
and the energy in the room of people is
increasing because people are more and
more people are appearing in the room
you know if they're coming into the room
that means more people are entering the
room than leaving it so the room's
getting more crowded the energy in the
rooms you know it's just obvious if your
bank account is going up if you're
getting richer you're taking in more
money than you're spending
you know if you're getting poorer you're
spending more money than you're taking
in it's all the same thing but it
doesn't tell you anything about
causality so for instance somebody the
fat
storage can go up for many reasons
but the fact that more energy is going
in than is leaving is just
another way of saying that
the energy stored in the fat is
increasing okay but where this gets
interesting is
for
what what people attack on this point is
okay i'm willing to buy that the body
has hormonal responses and like given if
the insulin levels going up then i'm
more likely to store fat but that
doesn't change the fact that if this
person who is getting obese would just
eat less
that they would hit a certain point
where it isn't possible for them to
store fat so while there might be some
complexities at play like let's just go
to the chase they just need to eat less
and it will work and you don't deny that
that's true right no of course not one
of the arguments always for this energy
balance idea was if you starve humans
or you starve in rodents they will lose
weight
and they'll eventually preferentially
burn their fat stores they won't at
first first they'll go through their
glycogen then they'll go start using
their protein and they'll shift over to
using fat to preserve their protein but
they will lose weight so
often times and i recently wrote about
this for the the new site stat news uh
and i got
numerous um
versions of emails that said in effect i
got i hate this um there were no fatties
at auschwitz
okay and unfortunately
obesity researchers actually thought
that way
because you could starve people
and they lost weight somehow that
translated to meaning they got fat to
begin with because they ate too much
so one of the ways
you challenge that kind of thinking
is you find other examples of biological
systems that you could affect in a
similar way so for instance you could
you have a growing child
and you can starve that child and stunt
its growth
but you would never say that it grows
because it eats too much because you
know that the growth is a hormonal
phenomenon driven by growth hormone and
something like growth factor and other
things and the child eats a lot because
it's fueling the growth which is a you
know biological response to the hormonal
secretions
you could starve a tumor
and inhibit the growth of the tumor
but you would never say that the tumor
grows because it eats too much even
though once a
cell becomes malignant it start it will
upregulate the receptors it needs to
take in more fuel to feed it that's
gross i think there's a subtle change in
there that i think you make clear in the
book and i just want to see if i'm
understanding this right which is
the
you can starve the child
and it will still grow despite the lack
of calories it won't grow as much
you can starve the tumor but it will
still grow it won't grow as much
and
what's interesting in like this whole
debate is
yes there you're not going to find any
obese people in auschwitz because you've
you've gone past some certain point that
is
the realm of reality right so most
people are are never going to live like
that there's huge implications when
they're not um you know confined and
having their food restricted that
they're going to go and eat to another
balance but where the story gets really
fascinating is somewhere in there is a
breaking point where you can actually
and you talk about this mouse study you
can actually have them in a semi-starved
state
and they still get a little fat
they don't get as fat as they would
yeah um that's not a mouse study i do
use examples of specific my studies but
it is effectively every mouse study so
you have any animal model of obesity and
the most famous two were the the where
you lesion the part of the brain called
the ventrum medial hypothalamus
um and then these uh leptin deficient
animals ob animals and in those cases
you can
um
in again literally semi-starve the
animal so then what what that means is
you measure the amount of food that a
lean animal will eat
and then you feed
this for instance the leptin deficient
animal only half of that
okay okay so the lean animal would eat
so we should be more or less in
starvation mode we should be in
starvation mode and yet as the animal
grows up it accumulates a massive amount
of excess fat anyway so that animal will
grow up to be obese it'll be smaller
than the lean animal it'll weigh less
but most of its calories will be it'll
have stored a significant amount of
calories as excess fat because that's
what its body is trying to do
and the point is in every animal model
of experiment you can literally you can
if not half starve animals you can
calorie restrict them you can only feed
them as much as a lean animal and the
animal will get fatter anyway it might
not may or may not get as fat as it
would if it got to eat at libidum but it
will get excess fat anyway and in some
cases will be definitively obese as with
these obob mice or the the bmh lesion
the animals
um what that tells you what it should
have told the researchers who began
doing these studies around 1940
is that the animals are have whatever
the defect is it's trying to make the
animal store calories as fat or the fat
tissue is now wired to take up fat and
not to let it go
and instead people just assumed that
somehow these animals were eating less
or they were more efficient so they were
still in the energy imbalance they tried
to hold on to their paradigm rather than
just simply say look these animals are
clearly storing calories as fat even
when they have starved
humans say they do that all the time
okay so that's always been a you know
the idea was people obese people said
yeah sure i can i can lose a little
weight by eating less
but i'm hungry all the time
and eventually the weight comes back and
in fact there are trials done there are
famous starvation studies done by ansel
keys at the university of minnesota
where he's starved conscientious
objectors for wanted to get 25 of their
weight off
and
they lost significant weight in the
first six weeks i forget the numbers at
the moment then they lost a little less
weight and then eventually their weight
loss stopped they were hungry all the
time they thought about food all the
time they're exhausted all the time
their hair fell out their sex drives
went away
they were miserable and then when they
started refeeding them at the end of the
trials they put fat back on at
extraordinary speeds
at rates that were different than the
caloric intake would predict would
predict that rate so you would predict a
certain amount of weight gain but
instead
it was just
sort of extraordinarily quick weight
gain and they all ended up fatter than
they started so one of the things that
study would say well
you took them off you let them eat
whatever they wanted
of course they're overeating the
calories they're in this massive surplus
and they're just putting it on as fat
there's there's no contradiction there
in the energy balance well you know when
you have competing paradigms there's
often no current contradictions the
paradigms tend
and by paradigms i mean you know the
literal understanding of a paradigm so
you have
a way of thinking about the problem
and you tend to ask different questions
so another way to look at this is just
to ask different questions and sure if
we starve
an obese person they'll lose weight if
we starve a lean person they'll lose
weight also okay
so the question is then when you re-feed
them why do they go back to being obese
when you allow them to refeed why do
they go back to being obese um for the
obese person the lean person only goes
back to being maybe a little fatter than
they used to be
um but the other issue is why is it you
have to starve the obese person to make
them lean
where the lean person can eat as much as
they want
and remain lean for them and it's
people's argument though that lean
person isn't eating as much as they want
they've got more control or they're
doing more exercise or maybe some are
generous and say
um their hypothalamus has turned up the
thermostat and their you know burning
some of these calories by kicking off
body heat or something like that
yeah and all of that's possible but now
you've got a whole variety of hypotheses
you could test
so one of the things you know one of my
problems with the research community in
general is they never bothered to test
their hypotheses once they embraced them
so that's you know at the end if you
remember at the end of good calories bad
calories in the epilogue i spent those
first time my editor really let me say
what i thought
and i
went off on the absolute
failure of this nutrition obesity
research community to do reasonable
science because even if when confronted
with a viable hypothesis
so what scientists do is they test their
hypotheses rigorously before they
believe them to be true and this that
didn't happen in this field
so the alternative is yeah it's quite
possible
that
you know the people remain lean just uh
consciously to moderation or one of the
things they believe they you know they
are smart enough to see when they're
getting heavy so then they eat less but
then you could ask the question how do
animals do it okay because animals seem
to eat as much as they want um certainly
you know you look at the
deer that you know are so copious in new
england um
you know you get a lot of food available
you get more deer you don't get fat or
deer and you don't get obese steer and
they seem to eat all the time
and they're only physically active when
they have to be they're not going out
jogging or running an extra mile um i
had these experiences in reporting good
calories bad calories one of my favorite
was um
i was
interviewing this uh
new zealand epidemiologist who michael
pollan had talked about in his book in
defense of food and she had done these
studies with
aborigines actually in australia
aboriginal populations who were living
in urban areas so they had relatively
high rates of obesity and diabetes and
hypertension and she moved them back to
the bush
and they lived like their ancestors did
and some of their populations still were
and they all got much healthier
and she said in the bush they couldn't
overeat
and then she told me the story of them
killing a kangaroo the day before and
eating six pounds of meat each
and i said this
you're gonna have to define overeating
to me because these people are eating
six pounds of cake roommate one day
and then she said yeah that's a good
point then she told me the story about
some of her colleagues coming out from
the university in this in the city where
they worked and they came out to visit
the
experiment going on in the bush and they
went for a jog
and these aboriginals
were sitting around on their haunches
laughing hysterically because this was
the funniest thing they'd ever seen
people voluntarily exercising if they
didn't have to
you know people come along
like herman poncer the duke
anthropologist who recently wrote a book
about his studies of aboriginal
populations around the world and how
they do not expend any more energy
than the rest of us do and yet they
remain remarkably lean as long as they
eat their traditional diets you know as
a journalist covering this field i had
the opportunity to move from discipline
to discipline to discipline and to ask
these questions to look for the
experiments to see if they were done to
look for the observations to see if you
could find observations that were
contrary so you can find populations
that had extreme obesity despite
relative starvation
before we go any farther i think
especially because i want to deal with
herman poncer who i've had on the show
um and
i i want to get your hypothesis about
what is going on and in the book you go
into a lot of detail about you know it's
really a tiny fraction of caloric
difference between somebody that
maintains their weight and somebody that
ends up putting on you know 20 pounds in
10 years or whatever right and it was
pretty startling to hear that and so
you're like nobody ever talks about it's
it's it's like i forget what you said
like 12 calories a day 20 pounds in a
decade is 19 calories a day stored as
fat
okay so that's the equivalent of like uh
i don't know two almonds worth of fat
maybe one and a half i forget the number
so
and it's it's
more interesting than that because
you basically store all the fat you
consume
so when you eat a mixed meal your body
immediately starts partitioning the fuel
so the the glucose
goes to the portal vein to the liver and
then to the rest of the body and you
burn that for fuel and then the fat that
you consume gets carried by the
lipoproteins called chylomicrons to the
fat tissue and stored and over the
course of a day
uh if you're eating a sort of
relative you know a diet of say typical
fat
composition
um you'll store on the about a thousand
calories in your fat cells
every day and then
if you're remaining lean
on average a thousand calories will come
out of your fat cells and be used for
fuel by then by the next day
but if you're getting fatter
only 980 calories will come out
okay
so that's what you have to explain and
again one of my arguments about the the
science in general is because people
don't even never bother to quantify
these effects
and because they don't actually study
the people who study obesity and hunger
don't actually pay attention to the
science of fat metabolism and fat
storage they're unaware of these numbers
some are some
they're getting more aware as people
like me have been hammering on them
but that's what you're explaining so
even if you say okay people get fat
because they eat too much you still have
to explain why eating too much only
leads to 19 or 20 calories a day being
trapped in the fat tissue out of a
thousand that goes in and 980 come out
you know it's a real just to say it in
like super layman's terms it is it is
this really tiny amount that no one is
going to be conscious of doing that
would be extraordinarily easy if getting
obese over a 10-year period were really
the difference between eating or not
eating two almonds like
you know it's pretty hard to believe
that somebody would be incapable of
doing that so that's the other thing so
if you're telling them to eat less
what's the issue especially
you know we all imagine okay well
somebody is obese they're 40 50 100
pounds overweight you could imagine how
hard it is to get that back down to
normal
but as we're getting fatter
we're getting fatter at this rate of 20
or 40 calories a day i have a friend i
use as an example in the book who by the
time he was 18 weighed 400 pounds
it's about six foot three
so he was you know if he had been 220
pounds lighter he would have had a
healthy bmi
and you figure out that 220 pounds over
18 years is about the equivalent of 100
calories a day stored as fat
okay
so he was storing 100 calories of fat a
day that his lean friends were not
if you could stop that i mean he was
miserable you know this kid was
tormented because he was trying to get
lean there were two reasons he was
miserable because he was trying to get
lean so
he was hungry his whole life
and he was being bullied and ridiculed
for not being lean
so the extraordinary social burden of
this disease
on top of this idea that you're trying
to eat less your whole life so you're
hungry your whole life on top of the
idea that you should be out there
exercising so it's like you know
i don't know if you've ever watched a
gym class of um
like 10 year olds run around the track
but you could separate they they
separate out basically by body fat
content so on the front you have the
short very lean ones who look like
kenyans but they're 10 years old and
they're flying around the track and
their feet are barely touching the
ground at the back you've got the poor
obese kids who are
you know every step is painful
and the idea is if those obese kids are
being ridiculed right because they're
running slowly they seem miserable
they're not flying and they're sitting
there thinking why can't i fly around
the track like these other kids what's
wrong with me
you know but the point is that's you're
talking 100 calories a day that's
you know
don't eat that egg
one day your your point with that is
that this is still such a small number
that if it really were just that this
would be an easy problem to solve now
where this gets messy
is that
a lot of times the people that really
get in bad shape if you look at their
diet
it's
not exactly health food
and so
what i want to begin to understand and i
think that the the idea of the lesion in
the brain of the um i think it was mice
uh
and how they they
become so ravenous that even as they're
waking up from the anesthetic they're
like almost you you refer to it as as
gasping for air but in like an eating
mechanism like they're they're just
there's something compelling them to eat
and you had a subtle
read on that that was different that
really begins to upend like what the the
paradigm as you were referring to
earlier is because i think people
watching right now still are not going
to be quite sure what your hypothesis is
about what's going on if it isn't
we know that eating less once you get to
a breaking point does work but why
there's this tremendous gray area in
people that put on fat easily
well
again
let's think about one of the arguments
i'm making against the energy balance
idea as soon as you decide that obesity
is an energy balance disorder that means
either intake is too high or expenditure
is too low
you fix it by decreasing intake or
increasing expenditure and what you
study
is appetite and hunger and energy
expenditure so you have these hypotheses
like
you know
maybe obese people just burn off more
calories or they run hot or something
like that and that could explain why
their fat tissue doesn't accumulate fat
what you don't study
is what was called intermediate
metabolism it might still be which is
all what happens to the foods after you
eat them
and you could create hypotheses
effortlessly whereby the fat tissue is
trapping fat remember it only has to do
20 calories a day if it somehow figures
out a way to just hold on to 20 calories
of the thousand that goes in you're
destined to become obese and what effect
that's going to have
on appetite and expenditure in the case
of these vmh lesioned animals with their
gasping for food which is how it was
described to me by a researcher who did
these
rodent experiments in the 60s and 70s
what's so interesting is
when you leash in that part of the brain
the ventral medially
ventral medial hypothalamus the first um
measurable
physiological effect you see is an
increase in insulin secretion so
basically these animals start hyper
secreting insulin
and what insulin does is it partitions
doesn't just partition calories into fat
it also shuts off the oxidation the use
of fat for fuel
okay so now you imagine these animals
there are
you uh uh
knock them out to do the surgery they
wake up from the surgery an hour or two
later
and while they've been asleep their
insulin has been elevated
and
their ability to oxidize fat is gone so
fat is the fuel you're burning when
you're not eating and you're not getting
the carbs so you've an effect created
two hours of starvation
and you've
cut off the
fuel supply that they would normally be
burning for fuel while there's
like for instance when they're asleep
insulin levels go down fat comes out of
the fat cells you burn the fat for fuel
that's why we don't wake up in the
middle of the night to go eat
because we're burning our fats our
insulin levels are low that allows us
both to mobilize fat from our fat cells
and to burn the fat for fuel once you've
created an infectious what's called
hyperinsulinemia
you've shut off that fuel supply since
the surgery the animal has been
literally starved
and then it wakes up from the surgery
starving and the reason it's been
literally starved it's because it's
can't use its fat for fuel
so it doesn't have any glucose in the
system and it can't access the fat so
it's literally dying for energy what is
it about damaging that region of the
brain that causes this is it that
damaging that region of the brain causes
a spike in insulin and the spike in
insulin is the problem or is there
something else going on well that's the
sort of thing i mean you know the way
when the researchers in the 1930s when
brain anatomists were doing these kind
of studies one of the ways you figure
out what the brain does
have different regions of the brain do
is you lesion
that region of the brain you basically
break it and you see what no longer
functions
so just happened to be that that was the
region of the brain that if you lesion
the animal will both get obese and
what's called hype manifest this
hyperphagia this extraordinary hunger
but the interesting thing was again you
could control its food intake
and the animal's going to get obese
anyway
so you can starve these are the mice
that you starve and they still end up
adding fat yeah in these cases you uh
you pair feed them so you only feed them
as much as a lean animal eats you only
feed them you calculate what they're
eating pre-surgery
and you only give them that much access
to that much food and they'll get obese
anyway
so
again the argument is that you blame it
on the eating too much so you assume and
the field did assume that the vengeful
medial hypothalamus is a is an appetite
control center this is at the heart of
still many theories of obesity
and the way we know this is because when
you break the animals get ob you get
hyperphagic they eat so much but they'll
and they then get obese but they'll get
obese even when they don't aren't
allowed to eat any more than lean
animals so what does eating too much
have to do with it and what's
interesting is
back in the early 1940s when these
studies were being done the leading
neuroanatomist of the day a man named
steven ransom at the
chicago i think was northwestern
university
ransom had just come out of doing
similar studies where you could create a
disease called diabetes insipidus by
lesioning a different part of the brain
and in diabetes insipidus the animals
urinate constantly and they're thirsty
all the time so they drink constantly
and what um
ransom figured out is that the the
lesion actually causes them to urinate
and so the thirst that they manifest is
not caused by the lesion it's caused by
the urge to replace the body water that
they're losing through the urination the
same thing happens in in
you know untreated diabetes of any kind
so
ransom said to himself look if the
animal is losing water
and he's so thirsty it's so thirsty
because it's replenishing that water
maybe this animal the vmh legion is
losing calories into the fat
and it's eating so much it's hyperphagia
because it's replacing the calories that
it can't that it's losing into the fat
just like the other animals losing water
by urinating so
his theory was basically just that that
the lesion causes the animal to
accumulate excess fat and the animal
eats a lot to
try and replace those calories and then
three months after he wrote that paper
ransom
died of a heart attack
and his graduate student who had created
this lesioning technique
albert hetherington of 1943 joined the
air force and went off to participate in
the second world war
and so they stopped arguing for that
theory and the counter theory that the
lesion caused the hyperphagia was being
touted by another former graduate
student of ransoms a guy named john
brobeck and john brobeck kept writing
about it and brobeck's theory took over
the field
purely because ransom died and
heatherington joined the air force
so crazy so your hypothesis if i can put
a fine point on it is the reason that
people who get fat easily get fat is not
because they're overeating
per se because that is still some part
of the equation um
they're still in taking enough food that
they're not below that breaking point
where no matter what you're going to
have a problem you're going to lose
weight their fats their fat cells for
reasons we have not yet discussed
are taking up more calories than they
ought to
and it is leaving them
perpetually accumulating fat because
they'll be hungry enough
that for them to eat so few calories
that with their supercharged desire to
grab fat it's basically an impossible
way to live unless somebody locks you in
a cage and so now people say
this concentration camp is the case may
be right yeah
so people thusly look at it and say and
this is where i think the complexity
comes in
they know the the judgmental person
looking at that person knows there is a
caloric point that i could drop you to
where you are going to get lean
but what they're not
realizing is that hey some people's fat
cells are sucking up an unusual amount
of fat which is leaving them
extraordinarily hungry and i'm going to
guess that part of this mechanism of
sucking up too much fat is an increase
in insulin and so now you're not only
storing too much fat but you're not
accessing the fat to burn and so now to
get fed you're going to need to eat
and
this part now i'm really guessing
that you may find yourself drawn to
carbohydrate foods because that's going
to turn to glycogen
or glucose excuse me uh in your system
and therefore now finally i have
something that i can burn but that's
going to exacerbate the situation
because now your insulin levels are
going to go back up and so you're in
like this death loop of the only thing
that makes me feel fed are these high
carbohydrate meals i'm able to pull a
ton of fat into my cells as it is but i
can't get it back out because of
elevated insulin levels it's not just
that you can't get about you you can get
it out on occasions but as long as the
insulin is elevated your body is being
told not to burn the fat but to burn the
carbs so if insulin is elevated
carbohydrates are your fuel so part of
this theory is also this concept of
insulin resistance
so your body becomes if you're
overweight
the
you know particularly abdominally if
your waist size is increasing that
pretty much tells you you're insulin
resistant if you're insulin resistant
your body has to secrete more insulin
to take up a set amount of
glucose from this from the circulation
and burn it for fuel
so
you have elevated abnormally elevated
levels of insulin most of the day and
when the insulin is elevated it's
telling the rest of your body to burn
carbs
it's telling your fat cells to store fat
it's telling the rest of your body don't
burn the fat because it's only supposed
to be elevated when there are
carbohydrates available
to be burned and so it's telling them to
burn carbs so carbs are in effect your
body's primary fuel source when insulin
is elevated and you can't switch over to
burning fat because the insulin prevents
that from happening
so now you crave carbs because that's
your fuel as your blood sugar starts to
go down you need to raise it back up so
you could burn it for fuel you crave
carbs and then sugar might be a special
case which gets into
the hepatic metabolism of the fructose
and
we probably don't want to go there at
this moment
not not at this moment because i think
there's um more to say here so
so if
insulin is raised
and that's part of why
the fat isn't being unlocked it's part
of why you crave carbohydrates as part
of how you get in this death loop
then the answer is well if there were a
food that you could eat that didn't
raise your insulin then even though you
put on fat more easily you should be
able to get into a position where you're
just not giving any extra
oomph to the system telling it to store
and store and store and so now we get
into cutting out carbohydrates
yeah well there's another aspect of this
which is um
your fat tissue is the most sensitive
tissue in the body to insulin
so if insulin is elevated even a little
bit your fat tissue will hold on to fat
that's what it does
and this
sensitivity of the fat the exquisite
sensitivity of fat insulin is something
that's been known since pretty much as
soon as they could measure insulin in
the bloodstream
which was the 1960s
um actually even before that when
researchers wanted to test whether or
not there was insulin in the like you
want to find out if someone secreting
insulin you take a blood sample you
inject some of the blood into a petri
dish which has fat cells from a rat in
it
because the fat cells will respond if
insulin is in the blood at any level
whereas other tissue might be resistant
to it the fat always stays sensitive to
it so the
idea is if you want to get fat out of
your fat tissue the fat has to see in
effect no insulin
and
how do you know if you're
how do you minimize your insulin levels
while you eat and affect the ketogenic
diet in fact if you're in ketosis it
means your liver is seeing basically
very little insulin and your fat is
seeing no insulin because it's
mobilizing fat from the fat cells so
that they can be converted to
ketones in the liver so the case for
keto is literally some people
you know the idea is so there's some
simple ideas that come out of it
carbohydrates are fattening because they
raise insulin and insulin makes us store
fat as fat
in our fat cells so the carbohydrates
regulate the fat storage in effect
through
primarily the hormone insulin other
hormones also play a role but you can
simplify it to insulin
um so carbohydrates are fattening
to those of us who fatten easily not all
of us are susceptible
and
if you want some of us the case for keto
if we want to get significant fat out of
our fat cells and keep it out then we
have to minimize insulin and minimizing
insulin means
and affect minimizing carbohydrate
consumption
one thing you said in the book really
plainly that
it it sort of put everything together
for me was when you're thinking about
people that put on fat easily it really
might be as simple as
the amount of insulin that needs to be
present in the bloodstream in order for
the fat cells to lock down to pull in
the fat and not release anything just
might be really low and so my wife has a
friend who man this woman all she eats
is carbohydrates and she is just stick
thin
now
if if that's true
that would make a lot of sense that she
just has a very high level that where
she can have insulin in her bloodstream
that's pulling out the glucose
but her fat cells tolerate quite a high
level and don't have that same ravenous
desire to partition
the available um calories into the fat
cells and when you think about it like
that my only remaining question is okay
that makes sense but where given that
energy balance is a real thing the
energy has to be going somewhere so what
is happening for her does does anybody
know have they done any tests like
what's going on is she breathing it out
is she running hotter is she
you know when i was growing up uh i have
an older brother is two years older than
i am and he's always a little taller and
he's always very lean the kind of kid
you could see like the the veins on his
arms and
you know when he was 10.
um
i never really thought about it we were
just different we were just different
you know he we both ate as much as
humanly possible
in fact by the time we were in our teens
we ate dinner and it was 18 minutes so
back then you know your
mother was a work you know a working
housewife would cook family style so
like two roast chickens for four people
and you know some starch and some green
vegetable and we would eat fast because
if i didn't eat fast my brother would
get to it before i did
so
massive amounts he was he could not put
on fat
and i could not have been as lean as he
was unless i starve myself he grew up he
became
didn't want to play football in college
because he saw on a chart in the coach's
office when he was making the rounds of
colleges that they had him bulking up
from 190 to 240. he was six foot five
and he thought that's out of the
question so he became a rower and he
would grow an hour a day and then run an
hour a day and you know lift weights an
hour a day and i became a football
player and i did get up to 240.
you know but i couldn't run 10 miles he
could do it you know
run 10 miles come home change into a
street clothes and go off to class i
would if i did it i would a my body
would break down and then i would be you
know in a coma for two days um
it's conceivable that the reason he
exercised so much he ate enormous
amounts of food i mean he once told me
that he didn't get never got stuffed he
just got bored of eating after a couple
of hours
whoa okay but he could not put on fat he
just couldn't do it so his body must
have burned those calories off and one
way you do it and when you again you go
back to the you know pre-1960s medical
literature the research would talk about
the impulse to physical activity like
literally having energy to burn
so somebody like him he's he's going for
10 mile run he's not
thin because he's running 10 miles he's
running 10 miles because his body
doesn't want to
store calories as fat so it's got to
burn them off it's a different way of
thinking about everything so you kind of
flip the causality going going back to
herman ponzer and
his take on the hadza is that
they're not burning any more calories
than anybody else
they intake a ton of carbohydrate in the
form of honey but i'm very curious
what what is going on there is do you
think that the data is inaccurate and
they really are being more active and
burning more calories i mean the
question is what so the issue was always
not the amount of carbohydrates but the
quality of the carbohydrates being
consumed
so western
populations you transition basically
refined grains and sugars were the
problem
um
and those hit harder in terms of insulin
versus honey
well that's what we don't know so then
the question is because in the west
you rarely see people eating more than a
pound or two of honey a year you look at
honey consumption over a century it
barely changes but what did change was
massive amounts of sugar um it's his
question what constitutes a black swan
for hypothesis so the part of the
hypothesis another aspect of it
discussed in good calories bad calories
is this western disease
observation
which begins actually in the late 19th
century with a french physician who
documents higher rates of cancer in
urban areas in rural areas and in europe
than in northern african populations and
postulates that's cancer as a disease of
civilization and then to the 20th
century a whole series of physicians
from all around the world observe that
when populations
transition from eating whatever their
traditional diet is
to western diets and lifestyles they
manifest obesity diabetes heart disease
hypertension arthritis a whole
cluster of metabolic diseases that that
also cluster together in patients
so the theory becomes what's causing it
by the 1960s the leading theory is for
sugar and white flour and that's british
physicians who have sort of
you know been
surveying all these
missionary and colonial physicians and
hospitals and clinics around the world
then that transitions into the sugar
only hypothesis
of a fellow named john yudkin and then
it ends as the idea that it's not the
presence of sugar or white flour it's
the absence of fiber
in this foods and the carbohydrate foods
we eat and
it's a story i tell in grade length and
good calories bad calories and how you
end up with a theory that could coexist
with the idea that dietary fat causes
heart disease the point is
it's clear that when populations are
westernized they manifest obesity
diabetes and
all these things and the viable
hypothesis is the refined carbohydrates
and the sugars maybe particularly the
sugars the
caloric sweeteners
and maybe even particularly coke and
pepsi that you drink
leads to insulin resistance which causes
or exacerbates the risk of all these
diseases
now the question is you find a
population like the hards hadza
and they're honey eaters
and they don't have high levels of
obesity and diabetes
is that enough to refute these other
this other idea so once you say this
population can eat significant honey
does that mean that it's not
the coke and the pepsi and the sweets
and the candy and the chocolate bars and
the
white flour
influencing insulin and all these other
populations
and the answer is i don't think it's
enough
because one possibility is that when the
hots has started consuming honey say a
thousand years ago
they had their obesity diabetes
epidemics then
and so what we have left is a population
that's particularly resistant to the
effect of
the fructose in the honey
and the uh it could be that when you eat
honey you eat it differently than you do
you know we drink sugary beverages all
day long um starting with breakfast and
then between snacks even if we're coffee
drinkers if we drink our coffee
sweetened we're basically
um titrating sugar all day
maybe i don't know how they eat honey
that could be different so the question
is
you know herman poncer as far as i know
i have to cop i didn't read his book
because it never got cheaper than 25 on
amazon on kindle and i've been waiting
for the price to come down even though i
know he's got a couple chapters in which
he makes fun of my ideas i should read
it
um
i don't believe that's technically a
black swan because the the hypothesis is
when a population transitions to western
diet particularly the refined grains and
sugars of a western diet that triggers
this physiological effect that manifests
as this cluster of metabolic diseases
the hadza have never made that
transition
one interesting thing to find out would
be if there are members of the hots or
who move into urban areas
and do start
drinking their
sugar instead of eating it as
um honey that would be interesting
because many of these observations were
made by
uh actually british and and
physician missionary physicians who
spent time in africa
who said look i see different disease
rates in
rural african tribes that i see in urban
african tribes so a different spectrum
of chronic diseases and in africa i have
uh
urban
black population that has very low
levels of
obesity and diabetes but if i go to
america i will see a black population
only 200 years separated in time
with very high levels of obesity and
diabetes so there's clearly something
about the american food environment that
has triggered this obese diabetic
phenotype the question is what is it
if it's not the honey if it's not the
sugar that if they you say that honey
refutes it
i don't think it's enough
um i think there are too many other
explanations for why the hodzin might be
able to consume honey and not get obese
and diabetic and heart disease and all
the rest
and what role if any do you think that
modern hyperpalatability of food which
would drive people to over consume
you know what role does that play like
in in i'll speak for myself like it's
hard for me and i'm super disciplined
it's hard for me not to just gobble
gobble gobble right it's there's so much
good food and it's literally designed to
make you want more
and so
do you think that that's one of the
things that plays a role or
again let's see if we can find a counter
example france
have you ever spent time in paris i have
okay now there's a city that is full of
extraordinary food and yet the french
are not do not tend towards obesity
okay so why not you could say well they
have a food environment they eat they
eat with their family they eat slower
they don't eat between meals blah blah
so you come up with all these hypotheses
to explain them but clearly the presence
of delicious food isn't enough
and i don't think there's a french chef
in the world wouldn't be insulted by the
idea that he doesn't try to make his
food hyper palatable and make sure that
you come back to his restaurant or her
restaurant rather than somebody else's
so
if you had to guess
um
what what is going on
is it is this an insulin game or
something else
well again if you just look at fat
storage
so here's the idea
we have a disorder of excess fat storage
okay that's first principles you know
somebody come they're 200 pounds
overweight their problem is 200 excess
pounds of fat
fat storage is dominated by the hormone
insulin
we know that that's no that's textbook
medicine it's been textbook medicine for
roughly 70 years
um
fix the fat storage
problem
did and the way
one obvious way to do that is to take
the carbohydrates out of the diet and
there are studies even going back animal
studies with
diabetes and animals you could uh this
famous physiological psychologist named
kurt richter did these experiments in
the 1940s where you create diabetic rats
you
give them this chemical that destroys
the the beta cells and the pancreas so
you have diabetic rats you let them
choose their own food and they'll choose
fat and protein
and not manifest diabetic symptoms
because they don't need the ins while
they need the insulin for the protein
but they have enough insulin left to
deal with the protein
so
and then we've got
you know
100 years of history of the efficacy of
very low-carb ketogenic diets for weight
loss it's just it's not nobody ever
doubted that they worked
the problem was people thought they
would kill you because of the high fat
content yeah so
walk me through how how do you live your
life from a dietary standpoint like are
you worried about cholesterol in the
book you talked about gout and uric acid
that was the one part where i was like
yo if the diet is giving you gout i
would say we have a problem here
um how do you
well so that's again it the question is
there's always a short-term and
long-term responses to the diet so if
you store for instance uric acid in your
fat cells now you're mobilizing fat and
the uric acids
being dumped into the circulation with
the fat
and then you accumulate to get
hyperuricemia and you now have gout
symptoms or reactivates gout i knew a
wall street partner and a big wall
street firm who said he tried atkins and
his gal
backed it up so he stopped doing it
which makes perfect sense but the
question is maybe after a month it'll go
away
if you have gotten rid of the uric acid
that's been stored to access and the
uric acid from my understanding is it
would be coming probably from
i guess you could get it from seafood uh
but more likely you're getting it from
fructose consumption you know one of my
favorite sayings in this business was
from uh eric westman who said it's not
what juliet is what your body does with
what you eat
and so yeah it could be from the
fructose it could be that you're just
whatever reason insulin resistance all
these years whatever reason caused you
to put on excess fat to begin with to
also generate
you know some excess uric acid you know
and as for the getting back the
cholesterol on the saturated fat let me
say this about the red meat the idea
remember we talked about western
diseases
and western diseases were
you know you take any traditional diet
you give them
that population a
western diet and lifestyle and they
manifest this cluster that's obesity
diabetes heart disease other things that
are going to kill us prematurely at some
point
um
many of these populations were
mostly carnivorous or very you know so
the inuits or the native americans of
the great plains or the pastoral
populations of kenya living on like you
know animal meat
were healthy until they ate western
diets so they would have been eating
significant red meat would the red meat
have been different
from the red meat wheat that's a
possibility
you know there's no way to avoid that
but i just
don't see that as the causal factor here
and as for cholesterol itself i very
much doubt that ldl cholesterol matters
in an environment of low insulin
um
if i had a his family history of heart
disease i would probably do a statin
just to hedge my bets
you know for someone whose father had i
have my best friend's father died of a
heart attack at 53. wow
um
you know it's a different risk benefit
analysis for him
um
ideally
we would do the studies to resolve this
issue
and you can do you know uh
scans and the like to look to see if
you're actually if your arteries are
calcifying and then make some decision
based on that
how do you teach your kids how to eat
uh
nagged them constantly
but
um
what are you talking about no
carbohydrate
uh
they hear that protein they hear that
from me professionally
my youngest is an athlete and naturally
lean
and
can eat a burrito the size of his head
without blinking
and uh
pretty much craves carbohydrates
and my oldest has my body type is thick
set and it's not athletic and pretty
much avoids carbs
so if you looked at them
you would say well clearly carbohydrates
make you lean because it's the lean one
who's eating them all the time
they have very different body types um
you know they both know how i feel about
sugar we don't keep fruit juices in the
house or sodas and uh
you know moderating their intake they
don't get dessert after meals
but
you know then at some point like me if
they start getting ex you know gaining
weight easily though they certainly have
the intellectual tools now and they've
heard me talk about it enough to other
people
that they can give my lectures for me
um but uh at this stage they don't need
it if they had real weight problems
and they were concerned you know then we
would
what do you say to somebody who does
have a weight problem they're an adult
they're prepared to do whatever it takes
um what's your
case for keto
i wrote that book to
make the argument that
carb if you're overweight you have to
carb restrict it's not about eating less
it's about lowering insulin levels and
if you really have a problem then you
might have to go to a ketogenic diet and
here's how to do and here's how to think
about it it's not
a religion it's not
you know it's it's
your body is
can tolerate the carbohydrate content so
here's how you eat without it yeah it's
really incredible gary the book was
amazing um where can people follow along
with you to learn more about
the way that you think and how to think
about food
well my books are available everywhere
fine books are sold um case for keto is
the latest that's coming out in
paperback in the end of december 2021.
um my website is garytalbs.com i tweet
gary taub's um i usually wish i didn't
after i did
um so that's interesting uh
i wrote the books because i
there's a lot to understand here
but once you get into it it's very
simple it's basically abstaining more or
less rigid abstinence from the cartridge
foods in the diet and
you know
makes people healthier
i agreed man thank you so much your work
has really changed my life in the way
that i eat and i can't thank you enough
i've been so excited to have you on the
show for a very long time so boys and
girls make sure that you read his books
uh the case for keto is absolutely
phenomenal i loved it a lot uh really
really enjoyed that one and speaking of
things you will really enjoy if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace
you